5 Interlude:ProcessAPI ASIDE: INTERLUDES Interludeswillcovermorepracticalaspectsofsystems, includingaparticularfocusonoperatingsystemAPIsandhowtousethem. Ifyoudon’t likepracticalthings,youcouldskiptheseinterludes.Butyoushouldlike practicalthings,because,well,theyaregenerallyusefulinreallife;companies,forexample,don’tusuallyhireyouforyournon-practicalskills. Inthisinterlude,wediscussprocesscreationinUNIXsystems.UNIX presentsoneof themost intriguingwaystocreateanewprocesswith apairofsystemcalls: fork()andexec(). Athirdroutine,wait(), canbeusedbyaprocesswishingtowaitforaprocessithascreatedto complete. Wenowpresent theseinterfaces inmoredetail,withafew simpleexamplestomotivateus.Andthus,ourproblem: CRUX:HOWTOCREATEANDCONTROLPROCESSES What interfacesshouldtheOSpresent forprocesscreationandcontrol?Howshouldtheseinterfacesbedesignedtoenablepowerfulfunctionality,easeofuse,andhighperformance? 5.1Thefork()SystemCall Thefork()systemcall isusedtocreateanewprocess[C63].However, beforewarned: it iscertainlythestrangest routineyouwill ever call1.Morespecifically,youhavearunningprogramwhosecodelooks likewhatyouseeinFigure5.1;examinethecode,orbetteryet,typeitin andrunityourself! 1Well,OK,weadmit thatwedon’tknowthat forsure;whoknowswhat routinesyou callwhennooneislooking?Butfork()isprettyodd,nomatterhowunusualyourroutinecallingpatternsare. 12 INTERLUDE: PROCESS API 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 #include <stdio.h> #include <stdlib.h> #include <unistd.h> int main(int argc, char *argv[]) { printf("hello (pid:%d)\n", (int) getpid()); int rc = fork(); if (rc < 0) { // fork failed fprintf(stderr, "fork failed\n"); exit(1); } else if (rc == 0) { // child (new process) printf("child (pid:%d)\n", (int) getpid()); } else { // parent goes down this path (main) printf("parent of %d (pid:%d)\n", rc, (int) getpid()); } return 0; } Figure 5.1: Calling fork() (p1.c) Whenyourunthis program (called p1.c), you’ll see the following: prompt> ./p1 hello (pid:29146) parent of 29147 (pid:29146) child (pid:29147) prompt> Let us understand what happened in more detail in p1.c. When it f irst started running, the process prints out a hello message; included in that message is its process identifier, also known as a PID. The process has a PID of 29146; in UNIX systems, the PID is used to name the process if one wants to do something with the process, such as (for example) stop it from running. So far, so good. Nowtheinteresting part begins. The process calls the fork() system call, which the OS provides as a way to create a new process. The odd part: the process that is created is an (almost) exact copy of the calling process. That means that to the OS, it now looks like there are two copies of the program p1 running, and both are about to return from the fork() system call. The newly-created process (called the child, in contrast to the creating parent) doesn’t start running at main(), like you might expect (note, the “hello” message only got printed out once); rather, it just comes into life as if it had called fork() itself. OPERATING SYSTEMS WWW.OSTEP.ORG [VERSION 1.10]INTERLUDE: PROCESS API 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 #include <stdio.h> #include <stdlib.h> #include <unistd.h> #include <sys/wait.h> int main(int argc, char *argv[]) { printf("hello (pid:%d)\n", (int) getpid()); int rc = fork(); if (rc < 0) { // fork failed; exit fprintf(stderr, "fork failed\n"); exit(1); } else if (rc == 0) { // child (new process) printf("child (pid:%d)\n", (int) getpid()); } else { // parent goes down this path int rc_wait = wait(NULL); printf("parent of %d (rc_wait:%d) (pid:%d)\n", rc, rc_wait, (int) getpid()); } return 0; } Figure 5.2: Calling fork() And wait() (p2.c) You might have noticed: the child isn’t an exact copy. Specifically, although it now has its own copy of the address space (i.e., its own private memory), its own registers, its own PC, and so forth, the value it returns to the caller of fork() is different. Specifically, while the parent receives the PID of the newly-created child, the child receives a return code of zero. This differentiation is useful, because it is simple then to write the code that handles the two different cases (as above). Youmightalsohavenoticed: theoutput(ofp1.c)isnotdeterministic. When the child process is created, there are now two active processes in the system that we care about: the parent and the child. Assuming we are running on a system with a single CPU (for simplicity), then either the child or the parent might run at that point. In our example (above), the parent did and thus printed out its message first. In other cases, the opposite might happen, as we show in this output trace: prompt> ./p1 hello (pid:29146) child (pid:29147) parent of 29147 (pid:29146) prompt> The CPU scheduler, a topic we’ll discuss in great detail soon, determines which process runs at a given moment in time; because the scheduler is complex, we cannot usually make strong assumptions about what ©2008–23, ARPACI-DUSSEAU THREE EASY PIECES4 INTERLUDE: PROCESS API it will choose to do, and hence which process will run first. This nondeterminism, as it turns out, leads to some interesting problems, particularly in multi-threaded programs; hence, we’ll see a lot more nondeterminism when we study concurrency in the second part of the book. 5.2 The wait() System Call So far, we haven’t done much: just created a child that prints out a message and exits. Sometimes, as it turns out, it is quite useful for a parent to wait for a child process to finish what it has been doing. This task is accomplished with the wait() system call (or its more complete sibling waitpid()); see Figure 5.2 for details. In this example (p2.c), the parent process calls wait() to delay its execution until the child finishes executing. When the child is done, wait() returns to the parent. Adding a wait() call to the code above makes the output deterministic. Can you see why? Go ahead, think about it. (waiting for you to think .... and done) Nowthat you have thought a bit, here is the output: prompt> ./p2 hello (pid:29266) child (pid:29267) parent of 29267 (rc_wait:29267) (pid:29266) prompt> With this code, we now know that the child will always print first. Why do we know that? Well, it might simply run first, as before, and thus print before the parent. However, if the parent does happen to run f irst, it will immediately call wait(); this system call won’t return until the child has run and exited2. Thus, even when the parent runs first, it politely waits for the child to finish running, then wait() returns, and then the parent prints its message. 5.3 Finally, The exec() System Call Afinal and important piece of the process creation API is the exec() system call3. This system call is useful when you want to run a program that is different from the calling program. For example, calling fork() 2There are a few cases where wait() returns before the child exits; read the man page for more details, as always. And beware of any absolute and unqualified statements this book makes, such as “the child will always print first” or “UNIX is the best thing in the world, even better than ice cream.” 3On Linux, there are six variants of exec(): execl(), execlp(), execle(), execv(), execvp(), and execvpe(). Read the man pages to learn more. OPERATING SYSTEMS WWW.OSTEP.ORG [VERSION 1.10]INTERLUDE: PROCESS API 5 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 #include <stdio.h> #include <stdlib.h> #include <unistd.h> #include <string.h> #include <sys/wait.h> int main(int argc, char *argv[]) { printf("hello (pid:%d)\n", (int) getpid()); int rc = fork(); if (rc < 0) { // fork failed; exit fprintf(stderr, "fork failed\n"); exit(1); } else if (rc == 0) { // child (new process) printf("child (pid:%d)\n", (int) getpid()); char *myargs[3]; myargs[0] = strdup("wc"); // program: "wc" myargs[1] = strdup("p3.c"); // arg: input file myargs[2] = NULL; // mark end of array execvp(myargs[0], myargs); // runs word count printf("this shouldn’t print out"); } else { // parent goes down this path int rc_wait = wait(NULL); printf("parent of %d (rc_wait:%d) (pid:%d)\n", rc, rc_wait, (int) getpid()); } return 0; } Figure 5.3: Calling fork(), wait(), And exec() (p3.c) in p2.c is only useful if you want to keep running copies of the same program. However, often you want to run a different program; exec() does just that (Figure 5.3). In this example, the child process calls execvp() in order to run the program wc, which is the word counting program. In fact, it runs wc on the source file p3.c, thus telling us how manylines, words, andbytes are found in the file: prompt> ./p3 hello (pid:29383) child (pid:29384) 29 107 1030 p3.c parent of 29384 (rc_wait:29384) (pid:29383) prompt> Thefork()systemcall is strange; its partner in crime, exec(), is not so normal either. What it does: given the name of an executable (e.g., wc), andsomearguments(e.g., p3.c), it loads code (and static data) from that ©2008–23, ARPACI-DUSSEAU THREE EASY PIECES6 INTERLUDE: PROCESS API TIP: GETTING IT RIGHT (LAMPSON’S LAW) As Lampson states in his well-regarded “Hints for Computer Systems Design” [L83], “Get it right. Neither abstraction nor simplicity is a substitute for getting it right.” Sometimes, you just have to do the right thing, and when you do, it is way better than the alternatives. There are lots of ways to design APIs for process creation; however, the combination of fork() and exec() are simple and immensely powerful. Here, the UNIX designers simply got it right. And because Lampson so often “got it right”, we name the law in his honor. executable and overwrites its current code segment (and current static data) with it; the heap and stack and other parts of the memory space of the program are re-initialized. Then the OS simply runs that program, passing in any arguments as the argv of that process. Thus, it does not create a new process; rather, it transforms the currently running program (formerly p3) into a different running program (wc). After the exec() in the child, it is almost as if p3.c never ran; a successful call to exec() never returns. 5.4 Why? Motivating The API Of course, one big question you might have: why would we build such an odd interface to what should be the simple act of creating a new process? Well, as it turns out, the separation of fork() and exec() is essential in building a UNIX shell, because it lets the shell run code after the call to fork() but before the call to exec(); this code can alter the environment of the about-to-be-run program, and thus enables a variety of interesting features to be readily built. The shell is just a user program4. It shows you a prompt and then waits for you to type something into it. You then type a command (i.e., the name of an executable program, plus any arguments) into it; in most cases, the shell then figures out where in the file system the executable resides, calls fork() to create a new child process to run the command, calls some variant of exec() to run the command, and then waits for the commandtocomplete by calling wait(). When the child completes, the shell returns from wait() and prints out a prompt again, ready for your next command. The separation of fork() and exec() allows the shell to do a whole bunch of useful things rather easily. For example: prompt> wc p3.c > newfile.txt 4And there are lots of shells; tcsh, bash, and zsh to name a few. You should pick one, read its man pages, and learn more about it; all UNIX experts do. OPERATING SYSTEMS WWW.OSTEP.ORG [VERSION 1.10]INTERLUDE: PROCESS API 7 In the example above, the output of the program wc is redirected into the output file newfile.txt (the greater-than sign is how said redirection is indicated). The way the shell accomplishes this task is quite simple: when the child is created, before calling exec(), the shell (specifically, the code executed in the child process) closes standard output and opens the file newfile.txt. By doing so, any output from the soonto-be-running program wc is sent to the file instead of the screen (open f ile descriptors are kept open across the exec() call, thus enabling this behavior [SR05]). Figure 5.4 (page 8) shows a program that does exactly this. The reason this redirection works is due to an assumption about how the operating system manages file descriptors. Specifically, UNIX systems start looking for free file descriptors at zero. In this case, STDOUT FILENO will be the f irst available one and thus get assigned when open() is called. Subsequent writes by the child process to the standard output file descriptor, for example by routines such as printf(), will then be routed transparently to the newly-opened file instead of the screen. Here is the output of running the p4.c program: prompt> ./p4 prompt> cat p4.output 32 109 prompt> 846 p4.c You’ll notice (at least) two interesting tidbits about this output. First, when p4 is run, it looks as if nothing has happened; the shell just prints the commandprompt and is immediately ready for your next command. However, that is not the case; the program p4 did indeed call fork() to create a new child, and then run the wc program via a call to execvp(). You don’t see any output printed to the screen because it has been redirected to the file p4.output. Second, you can see that when we cat the output file, all the expected output from runningwcisfound. Cool, right? UNIX pipes are implemented in a similar way, but with the pipe() system call. In this case, the output of one process is connected to an inkernel pipe (i.e., queue), and the input of another process is connected to that same pipe; thus, the output of one process seamlessly is used as input to the next, and long and useful chains of commands can be strung together. As a simple example, consider looking for a word in a file, and then counting how manytimessaidwordoccurs; withpipes andtheutilities grep and wc, it is easy; just type grep-o foo file | wc-l into the command prompt and marvel at the result. Finally, while we just havesketchedouttheprocessAPIatahighlevel, there is a lot more detail about these calls out there to be learned and digested; we’ll learn more, for example, about file descriptors when we talk about file systems in the third part of the book. For now, suffice it to say that the fork()/exec() combination is a powerful way to create and manipulate processes. ©2008–23, ARPACI-DUSSEAU THREE EASY PIECES8 INTERLUDE: PROCESS API 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 #include <stdio.h> #include <stdlib.h> #include <unistd.h> #include <string.h> #include <fcntl.h> #include <sys/wait.h> int main(int argc, char *argv[]) { int rc = fork(); if (rc < 0) { // fork failed fprintf(stderr, "fork failed\n"); exit(1); } else if (rc == 0) { // child: redirect standard output to a file close(STDOUT_FILENO); open("./p4.output", O_CREAT|O_WRONLY|O_TRUNC, S_IRWXU); // now exec "wc"... char *myargs[3]; myargs[0] = strdup("wc"); // program: wc myargs[1] = strdup("p4.c"); // arg: file to count myargs[2] = NULL; // mark end of array execvp(myargs[0], myargs); // runs word count } else { // parent goes down this path (main) int rc_wait = wait(NULL); } return 0; } Figure 5.4: All Of The Above With Redirection (p4.c) 5.5 Process Control And Users Beyond fork(), exec(), and wait(), there are a lot of other interfaces for interacting with processes in UNIX systems. For example, the kill() system call is used to send signals to a process, including directives to pause, die, and other useful imperatives. For convenience, in most UNIX shells, certain keystroke combinations are configured to deliver a specific signal to the currently running process; for example, control-c sends a SIGINT(interrupt)totheprocess(normallyterminating it) and control-z sends a SIGTSTP (stop) signal thus pausing the process in mid-execution (you can resume it later with a command, e.g., the fg built-in command found in many shells). The entire signals subsystem provides a rich infrastructure to deliver external events to processes, including ways to receive and process those signals within individual processes, and ways to send signals to individual processes as well as entire process groups. To use this form of comOPERATING SYSTEMS WWW.OSTEP.ORG [VERSION 1.10]INTERLUDE: PROCESS API 9 ASIDE: RTFM — READ THE MAN PAGES Many times in this book, when referring to a particular system call or library call, we’ll tell you to read the manual pages, or man pages for short. Man pages are the original form of documentation that exist on UNIX systems; realize that they were created before the thing called the webexisted. Spending some time reading man pages is a key step in the growth of a systems programmer; there are tons of useful tidbits hidden in those pages. Some particularly useful pages to read are the man pages for whichever shell you are using (e.g., tcsh, or bash), and certainly for any system calls your program makes (in order to see what return values and error conditions exist). Finally, reading the man pages can save you some embarrassment. When you ask colleagues about some intricacy of fork(), they may simply reply: “RTFM.”Thisis yourcolleagues’ wayofgentlyurgingyoutoRead The Manpages. The F in RTFMjust adds a little color to the phrase... munication, a process should use the signal() system call to “catch” various signals; doing so ensures that when a particular signal is delivered to a process, it will suspend its normal execution and run a particular piece of code in response to the signal. Read elsewhere [SR05] to learn more about signals and their many intricacies. This naturally raises the question: who can send a signal to a process, andwhocannot? Generally, thesystemsweusecanhavemultiplepeople using them at the same time; if one of these people can arbitrarily send signals such as SIGINT (to interrupt a process, likely terminating it), the usability and security of the system will be compromised. As a result, modern systems include a strong conception of the notion of a user. The user, after entering a password to establish credentials, logs in to gain access to system resources. The user may then launch one or many processes, and exercise full control over them (pause them, kill them, etc.). Users generally can only control their own processes; it is the job of the operatingsystemtoparceloutresources(suchasCPU,memory,anddisk) to each user (and their processes) to meet overall system goals. 5.6 Useful Tools There are many command-line tools that are useful as well. For example, using the ps command allows you to see which processes are running; read the manpagesforsomeusefulflagstopasstops. Thetooltop is also quite helpful, as it displays the processes of the system and how much CPU and other resources they are eating up. Humorously, many times when you run it, top claims it is the top resource hog; perhaps it is a bit of an egomaniac. The command kill can be used to send arbitrary ©2008–23, ARPACI-DUSSEAU THREE EASY PIECES10 INTERLUDE:PROCESSAPI ASIDE:THESUPERUSER(ROOT) Asystemgenerallyneedsauserwhocanadministerthesystem,andis notlimitedinthewaymostusersare. Suchausershouldbeabletokill anarbitraryprocess(e.g., ifitisabusingthesysteminsomeway),even thoughthatprocesswasnotstartedbythisuser.Suchausershouldalso beabletorunpowerfulcommandssuchasshutdown(which,unsurprisingly,shutsdownthesystem). InUNIX-basedsystems,thesespecialabilitiesaregiventothesuperuser(sometimescalledroot).Whilemostusers can’tkillotherusersprocesses,thesuperusercan.Beingrootismuchlike beingSpider-Man:withgreatpowercomesgreatresponsibility[QI15]. Thus, toincreasesecurity(andavoidcostlymistakes), it’susuallybetter tobearegularuser;ifyoudoneedtoberoot,treadcarefully,asallofthe destructivepowersofthecomputingworldarenowatyourfingertips. signalstoprocesses,ascantheslightlymoreuserfriendlykillall.Be suretousethesecarefully;ifyouaccidentallykillyourwindowmanager, thecomputeryouaresittinginfrontofmaybecomequitedifficulttouse. Finally, therearemanydifferentkindsofCPUmetersyoucanuseto getaquickglanceunderstandingoftheloadonyoursystem;forexample, wealwayskeepMenuMeters(fromRagingMenacesoftware)runningon ourMacintoshtoolbars,sowecanseehowmuchCPUisbeingutilized atanymoment intime. Ingeneral, themoreinformationaboutwhat is goingon,thebetter. 5.7Summary WehaveintroducedsomeoftheAPIsdealingwithUNIXprocesscreation:fork(),exec(),andwait().However,wehavejustskimmed thesurface. Formoredetail, readStevensandRago[SR05],ofcourse, particularlythechaptersonProcessControl,ProcessRelationships,and Signals;thereismuchtoextractfromthewisdomtherein. WhileourpassionfortheUNIXprocessAPIremainsstrong,weshould alsonotethatsuchpositivityisnotuniform. Forexample,arecentpaperbysystemsresearchersfromMicrosoft,BostonUniversity,andETH inSwitzerlanddetailssomeproblemswithfork(), andadvocatesfor other, simplerprocesscreationAPIssuchasspawn()[B+19]. Readit, andtherelatedworkit refers to, tounderstandthisdifferentvantage point. Whileit’sgenerallygoodtotrust thisbook, remember toothat theauthorshaveopinions;thoseopinionsmaynot(always)beaswidely sharedasyoumightthink. OPERATING SYSTEMS [VERSION1.10] WWW.OSTEP.ORGINTERLUDE: PROCESS API 11 ASIDE: KEY PROCESS API TERMS • Each process has a name; in most systems, that name is a number known as aprocess ID (PID). • Thefork() system call is used in UNIX systems to create a new process. The creator is called the parent; the newly created process is called the child. As sometimes occurs in real life [J16], the child process is a nearly identical copy of the parent. • The wait() system call allows a parent to wait for its child to complete execution. • The exec() family of system calls allows a child to break free from its similarity to its parent and execute an entirely new program. • A UNIX shell commonly uses fork(), wait(), and exec() to launch user commands; theseparation of fork and exec enables features like input/output redirection, pipes, and other cool features, all without changing anything about the programs being run. • Process control is available in the form of signals, which can cause jobs to stop, continue, or even terminate. • Which processes can be controlled by a particular person is encapsulated in the notionofauser; theoperatingsystemallowsmultiple users onto the system, and ensures users can only control their own processes. • Asuperuser can control all processes (and indeed do many other things); this role should be assumed infrequently and with caution for security reasons. ©2008–23, ARPACI-DUSSEAU THREE EASY PIECES12 INTERLUDE: PROCESS API References [B+19] “A fork() in the road” by Andrew Baumann, Jonathan Appavoo, Orran Krieger, Timothy Roscoe. HotOS ’19, Bertinoro, Italy. A fun paper full of fork()ing rage. Read it to get an opposing viewpoint on the UNIX process API. Presented at the always lively HotOS workshop, where systems researchers go to present extreme opinions in the hopes of pushing the community in new directions. [C63] “AMultiprocessor SystemDesign”byMelvinE.Conway. AFIPS’63FallJointComputer Conference, New York, USA 1963. An early paper on how to design multiprocessing systems; may be the first place the term fork() was used in the discussion of spawning new processes. [DV66]“ProgrammingSemanticsforMultiprogrammedComputations”byJackB.Dennisand Earl C. Van Horn. Communications of the ACM, Volume 9, Number 3, March 1966. A classic paper that outlines the basics of multiprogrammed computer systems. Undoubtedly had great influence on Project MAC, Multics, and eventually UNIX. [J16] “They could betwins!” byPhoebeJackson-Edwards. TheDailyMail. March1, 2016.. This hard-hitting piece of journalism shows a bunch of weirdly similar child/parent photos and is frankly kind of mesmerizing. Go ahead, waste two minutes of your life and check it out. But don’t forget to come back here! This, in a microcosm, is the danger of surfing the web. [L83] “Hints for Computer Systems Design” by Butler Lampson. ACM Operating Systems Review, Volume 15:5, October 1983. Lampson’s famous hints on how to design computer systems. You should read it at some point in your life, and probably at many points in your life. [QI15] “With Great Power Comes Great Responsibility” by The Quote Investigator. Available: https://quoteinvestigator.com/2015/07/23/great-power. The quote investigator concludes that the earliest mention of this concept is 1793, in a collection of decrees made at the French National Convention. The specific quote: “Ils doivent envisager qu’une grande responsabilit´e est la suite ins´eparable d’un grand pouvoir”, which roughly translates to “They must consider that great responsibility follows inseparably from great power.” Only in 1962 did the following words appear in Spider-Man: “...with great power there must also come–great responsibility!” So it looks like the French Revolution gets credit for this one, not Stan Lee. Sorry, Stan. [SR05] “Advanced Programming in the UNIX Environment” by W. Richard Stevens, Stephen A. Rago. Addison-Wesley, 2005. All nuances and subtleties of using UNIX APIs are found herein. Buy this book! Read it! And most importantly, live it. OPERATING SYSTEMS WWW.OSTEP.ORG [VERSION 1.10]INTERLUDE: PROCESS API 13 Homework(Simulation) This simulation homework focuses on fork.py, a simple process creation simulator that shows how processes are related in a single “familial” tree. Read the relevant README for details about how to run the simulator. Questions 1. Run./fork.py-s 10andseewhichactionsaretaken. Canyou predict what the process tree looks like at each step? Use the-c f lag to check your answers. Try some different random seeds (-s) or add more actions (-a) to get the hang of it. 2. Onecontrolthesimulator gives youis thefork percentage,controlled by the-f flag. The higher it is, the more likely the next action is a fork; the lower it is, the more likely the action is an exit. Run the simulator with a large number of actions (e.g.,-a 100) andvarythefork percentagefrom0.1to0.9. Whatdoyou think the resulting final process trees will look like as the percentage changes? Check your answer with-c. 3. Now, switch the output by using the-t flag (e.g., run ./fork.py-t). Given a set of process trees, can you tell which actions were taken? 4. One interesting thing to note is what happens when a child exits; what happens to its children in the process tree? To study this, let’s create a specificexample: ./fork.py-A a+b,b+c,c+d,c+e,c-. This example has process ’a’ create ’b’, which in turn creates ’c’, which then creates ’d’ and ’e’. However, then, ’c’ exits. What do you think the process tree should like after the exit? What if you use the-R flag? Learn more about what happens to orphaned processes on your own to add more context. 5. One last flag to explore is the-F flag, which skips intermediate steps and only asks to fill in the final process tree. Run ./fork.py-F and see if you can write down the final tree by looking at the series of actions generated. Use different random seeds to try this a few times. 6. Finally, use both-t and-F together. This shows the final process tree, but then asks you to fill in the actions that took place. By looking at the tree, can you determine the exact actions that took place? In which cases can you tell? In which can’t you tell? Try some different random seeds to delve into this question. ©2008–23, ARPACI-DUSSEAU THREE EASY PIECES14 INTERLUDE: PROCESS API ASIDE: CODING HOMEWORKS Codinghomeworksaresmallexerciseswhereyouwritecodetorunon a real machine to get some experience with some basic operating system APIs. After all, you are (probably) a computer scientist, and therefore should like to code, right? If you don’t, there is always CS theory, but that’s pretty hard. Of course, to truly become an expert, you have to spend more than a little time hacking away at the machine; indeed, find every excuse you can to write some code and see how it works. Spend the time, and become the wise master you know you can be.